[Music]
microfocus creators of visual
programming tools for software
development is pleased to provide major
funding for the computer product the
story of this continuing evolution
Gary what I have here is a Rob chip in
this cartridge and I'm going to take
this drama trip and take it inside this
machine and load it in there and press a
couple of buttons and if everything
works according to plan this is an
example of computer music and computer
music as our subject today this this
little RAM pack which I have over here
has 15 songs on it matter of fact
there's a ROM chip of the Month Club now
where you can buy your popular songs in
a chip instead of on a cassette tape or
on a record this is a simple example but
but how does a computer make music how
is it doing this well as your were
Stewart this is a very special device
it's not a general-purpose computer but
most of the home computers that are
available now like the Commodore 64 or
the IBM personal computer have special
hardware for sound generation or tone
generation and what you do is you write
a program in basic or logo or one of
those languages if you like and and then
you can produce talent series of tones
and certain frequency and duration and I
get understand there's also there are
also some software packages coming about
that a like word processing packages
only is for music processing or score
processing and it's gonna be interesting
today I think you guys will have some
real experts they'll tell us all about
it indeed we will will be meeting will
Harvey the author of music instruction
set will see a demonstration of the
Alpha Centauri music system and there
are two major centers for computer music
in the country one here in Northern
California at Stanford we'll be meeting
the director of the Stanford center
later on in the program first let's go
across the country to Cambridge
Massachusetts and a visit to mi t--'s
experimental music studio
[Music]
the use of computers and musical
composing is not a new idea but recent
advances are giving composers a new
degree of power over their medium the
ability to create and manipulate sound
waves of their own design systems like
MIT s music 100 can detect a note into
its sound wave components the composer
can then make adjustments to each aspect
of the notes physical characteristics
independently and instantly specially
developed music languages translate the
sound processing as specified by the
composer from this input a digital data
stream is computed finally the digital
form is translated into a signal for
amplification pre-recorded and played
back over audiotape during the
performance a computer that can
reassemble the building blocks of a
sound wave opens up a new spectrum to
the composer and the musician a range of
sounds beyond the natural limits of
mechanical instruments and the human
voice in a sense the music program can
compose not only the score but the
instrument as well the next step in
computer composer interaction is
real-time production synthesis a live
interactive performance between computer
and instrument to achieve this kind of
instantaneous but programmed
manipulation requires very high-speed
computers capable of several hundred
million calculations per second
[Music]
okay joining us now is will Harvey will
create a music instruction set a hot
piece of software being offered by
Electronic Arts right now and John
Channing John is director of Stanford's
Center for computer research in music
and acoustics right Carmo we call it you
know this invention I think without
Casio telling I finally found an
instrument that I can play John I think
it'd be worthwhile just to talk for a
minute about the the state of the
computer generated music where are we at
today well it's I guess nearly 20 years
old when since Bell Labs engineers and
scientists first conceived the idea and
what's happened in in the recent years
which is evident in things like personal
computers and that is large-scale
integration and what that means
specifically as far as as computer music
is concerned is that we're getting more
and more power in smaller smaller
smaller and smaller units which means
that what was in once in the lab now can
be put in concert hall or in too small
it's smaller environments so some pure
is john and maybe we'll you could talk
from your end on this to think that
computers and music is somehow wrong
it's an Audi personalizing composition
and creativity what what role really
does the computer play in computer music
John well a computer of course being
based upon programming languages is
really an access I think to to a mode of
thought or a body of thought that really
represents I guess tens of thousands of
nine years of thought about thought and
I think that's the significant
difference between computers and music
and electronic musical instruments of
the preceding years that is so as soon
as a computer language is involved there
one has access to a degree of power and
generality which was certainly not the
case in ordinary electronic musical
instruments and look what bills are
wills done here with a personal computer
and a programming language and a
considerable amount of imagination
it really doesn't deep personalized
music I think but rather maybe humanism
humanizes computers I guess I would is
it what do you think it helps with a
composition process to this composing
music does interact I sure I think a
programming language is such an enormous
lis rich resource that it must at any
level enhance the compositional process
well you guys are different ends a bit
John is working at Stanford with a big
mini and a complex operation and you're
selling a $40 software from urine how do
you see computers in music meshing I
mean how did you get involved in this
combination I think computers are way
that people can be introduced to music
and with this program what we tried to
do is allow a person who doesn't know
anything about music and who might be
intimidated you can buy it to go out and
and to fool around with music already
already created or to create his own and
I be able to do everything just just
with a joystick maybe you can show us a
little bit about how a music instruction
so it works okay well basically you're
moving around with the joystick a little
hand in that hand represents your hand
so in order to create music what you do
is you move your hand around and you
pick up notes and you set them on the
staff what you see there after you get
the notes set up on the staff you can
move to one of these little pictures
here and the pictures do things for
instance if you want to play the music
you go to the little piano which is
there or if you want to go to the home
position which is at the beginning of
the song you go to little home and press
the button I've got a piece here that is
included with the product and so I'll
move the hand down to the piano and
press the button it'll play through the
piece
[Music]
then going to the home we can go back to
the notes going across the staff who are
showing us the music that the computers
right right
basically it's timed together what it
sounds like and what is on the screen so
it's like having sheet music in front of
you that that Scrolls right past your
desk whereas with the sheet music you
can pick up your pencil and eraser and
erase notes and change them and move
them around or even pull out the
scissors and cut and paste in different
areas with this you can move your hand
around pick up a note move it somewhere
else and drop it if you want to sharpen
note you just press the button to hear
what the note on that particular place
sounds like right actually I dropped the
note and which actually changed the
music that's in there right now so if I
played this it wouldn't sound very
pretty it also tells me what that note
sounds like I'm so if I were composing
music for instance or just wanted to
know where it was I could tune my ear
certainly makes a learning bug music a
lot more fun a lot of times you can
start out instead of having to learn to
play an instrument I'm you have to learn
to use a joystick which is not that
difficult but you can start out by
taking Mozart or Bach and then fooling
around with it and changing notes and
seeing what seeing what it sounds like
what's your experience that people are
first playing around this do they do
they like to learn about music because
of this interaction the first the first
thing whenever on whenever they see a
new computer program is is to be overly
cautious so they'll move around the hand
and be very careful not to move a note
too far this is that but it doesn't take
too long me five or ten minutes before
they realize hey this is fun I'm not
going to kill myself if I do something
wrong
well you said this program is for people
who don't know too much about music but
you said you've got to take a note and
place it on the staff and a person who
doesn't know much about music doesn't
really know how to do that
well um as far as moving a note around
the instruction manual tells you what
the staff is and some of the basic music
notations you are required to be able to
move around notes move around the hand
pick up and drop notes but you don't
have to know if this is an
B or C sharp or what for instance I can
point to this position here I'm pointing
to that note and I could say well what
am i pointing to right now press P and
it plays the note it says I'm on D and
it also says down here you're sitting on
note D so it correlates the position on
the staff of the note the sound of the
note and the letter name of the note
which is a novel idea John
briefly how would that compare with the
kinds of things you're doing at Stanford
well let's see we assume for example in
our environment that these abstract
symbols notation have already been
learned I mean our activity is really
centered around musicians who have
studied for some considerable time and
engineers and psycho acquisitions for
example and are interested in notation
is maybe at a slightly different level
having to do rather with music
manuscript and perhaps later we can talk
a bit about that but I think find this
very interesting because it's as Will
has pointed out it's a it's a very
accessible medium and through which one
can learn a rather abstract and
difficult sort of language if you will I
mean music notation I think that's good
okay in just a moment we're going to
take a look at a reasonably
sophisticated device which you can plug
into your computer the Alpha Centauri
system and that's coming up next
[Music]
with us now is Ellen laughing Ellen is
president and co-founder of Centauri
Corporation the people who make the
Alpha Centauri computer music system
Yuri Jelena what you have here seems to
be somewhat different from wills
previous demonstration how does what
you're doing differ from the music
instruction set we're both in the music
business and we're both in fact using
computers to do things that are musical
the key concept behind Centauri and what
we do with music
simply music is turning it into a
musical instrument a live musical
instrument that you can play you can
listen to you can transform sounds with
you can design sound you can compose and
you can even learn keyboard so what I'm
actually can show you today is a program
we call simply music what I'm looking at
on the screen here is a list of albums
just as I have a 45 rpm record on my
player or 33 so I have a disc at it goes
in my disc drive and now when I get to a
directory or catalogue I can see the
list of songs I have previously recorded
or someone else recorded loaded in why
don't we listen to yaizu now I played
that piece in a couple of weeks ago or
someone else did or perhaps you played
it in yesterday if you're learning to
play keyboard though listening to music
is not just what you need to do you also
need to see what's going on
[Music]
so we're using the power of the computer
now to give you a keyboard instrument
that you can play and listen to give you
a video screen that shows you the music
you're playing and if you don't know how
to read music I will help you even
further I can load and display the
keyboard itself so that when I play back
Yazoo I can see the parts that were
played
now that's a fairly complex piece if I
were learning to play music if I'd never
approached a musical instrument before
or a computer music system I might
choose it more easy to learn songs for
instance merrily now this is pretty
simple song but it gets the point across
that you too can learn to play keyboard
with this fairly fancy technology just
by
[Music]
that sounds like segue music Ellen and
I'm going to take advantage of that
music to turn to John for a second and
John one thing of course you're dealing
with a computer so large and couldn't
bring it here in the studio at your
Stanford location one thing you're
involved in is music notation I think
you have an example of that in front of
you sure yeah but that well it's an
extension of the same idea and I guess
so demonstrates what one can do with an
enormous amount of effort and over in a
large number of years this is a program
that was developed by Lehman Smith also
on the music faculty who over a 10-year
period has has refined the music
manuscript
program which allows one to use a
standard printer plotter
to output music and large scale and it's
photo reduced for to become publisher
quality well the advantages are that his
program automatically finds does part
extraction finds page turns and and of
course eliminates all the problems of
error making and music publishing so
it's a it's a contribution of
considerable importance I think in the
music industry the same basic ideas but
reaching a very high degree of
refinement
John okay you've brought with with you
an audio tape from your system at
Stanford we're going to play that tape
right now and if you can put on the
headset so that you can hear it as we
play it and and tell us what's going on
in this audio tape okay this is an
example of high quality vocal synthesis
using frequency modulation synthesis it
took it took me about six months to find
the little cused and naturalness that
seemed to be so very often lacking and
in most electronic music synthesis now
having worked out this algorithm we can
play the next example and hear an
extension of nature into a slightly
unreal domain for example I modeled now
the human voice but of a very very large
man so it's deeper than any real human
being could sing as if he had a six-foot
chest chest I guess in the 3-foot neck
so the vertical resonance is amazing
amplified because we have this
independent control over the dimensions
of sound in
Stratfor now one of the most important
things about synthesis and which will
accrue to devices as such as this and
the things that little synthesis
algorithm that will which using has to
do with using the technology in such a
way that we we we have a very clear
sense of what's natural sounding the
next example demonstrates first just a
pure tone which will mill here which is
the pitch of what will become a some
vocal tone then in a few seconds we had
all the harmonics or information that
would be president in real some tone but
it only becomes natural at the moment we
introduce the vibrato and this kind of
wiggling in the pitch space which is
common to all natural sounds virtually
much more pure tone
now harmonics but not natural
and now it sounds natural sounds vocal
like so we can by doing a vast amount of
research and analysis in cyclic ooh
snakes and signal processing we can
extend to this miniaturization which we
see a kind of quality of sound which I
think will be a very great improvement
okay John we're going to move from
Stanford now and go back across the
country to Cambridge and MIT is
experimental music studio for a brief
performance of a duet for piano and
computer
[Music]
John is a work that we're seeing in
computer generated music is that still
mostly in the laboratory or is it being
used in production well I think with the
large scale integration we're seeing
many of the techniques that have been
developed and programs etc over the
years that in the context of a lab
finding application now in industry I
there are you know music synthesis
algorithms that can be implemented in
large-scale integrated circuits we'll
certainly more and more find find use
and devices of this sort and organs and
synthesizers and who knows what else
Ellen you mentioned earlier the concept
of your floppy disk is a kind of record
album with titles on it we saw at the
beginning of the program is kind of Rama
cartridge do you see a kind of new form
of music publishing and what you would
buy floppy disks for a computer playback
system absolutely in fact my floppy disk
is my personal diskette I can self
publish which means that now I'm a
composer and a publisher all rolled up
into one that is I have my Satori I save
I generate my own music I save it on
diskette and I can send it off to
friends across the country or around the
world so now I read every musician and
every student becomes a publisher and
that means also that the teachers become
publishers of their own musical material
and the professional composers can also
publish for the audience of people who
have the same instrument so absolutely
yes it is a new form of publishing but a
very personal one very quickly we have
about a half a minute left do you find a
resistance among professional musicians
and composers
they really love to get into this well
Stanford virtually every composer who
comes to study there not only learns
about computer music becomes a rather
exceptionally good programmer so I think
there's very little resistance
especially in the young generation after
all people to start the age of is at
will of the young men well I mean he's
already beat the hurdle you see he
already understands a great deal about
programming because these things are in
the environment and that's good
okay John shouting of Stanford and Ellen
laughs moves and Tory thanks so much for
being here and thank you for joining us
we'll see you next week again on the
computer Chronicles
[Music]
microfocus creators of visual
programming tools or software
development is pleased to provide major
funding for the computer chronicles the
story of this continuing revolution
[Music]
you